#The things you don't own end up owning you.

I got an email today letting me know that Ness was being shut down.  What is Ness, you may ask?

[Ness](https://likeness.com/?q=Breakfast&near=Washington+DC) is an app I never use, that I downloaded because I read about it in some 4As research on travel and destination trends on mobile usage.  I have a whole category of apps on my phone that I've signed up for so I can see how they work, just as part of keeping up to date.  Usually, I play with them for a few days, and then all I ever do is let the App Store install updates for them, and waste bandwidth.  Last week I installed [Cloak](http://usecloak.com/) - it's the app of the moment in the creative industry press - so that I could avoid acquaintances who still actually use Foursquare.

Ness is (was) supposed to give you smarter restaurant recommendations based on your Facebook profile and how you rated other restaurants.  I'm always leery of letting apps have access to my social profiles; right before I stopped using Foursquare, it automatically awarded me the "Crunked" badge without telling me, alerting all my Twitter followers (Hi Dad!) that I'd been to bars 4 nights in a row that week.

Ness was decent at suggesting restaraunts in my brief testing period, even with a few bugs (and the-all-too-broad definition of a restaraunt that includes Starbucks).  It was threatening to the status quo, at least a little, so OpenTable bought it and shut it down.  One fewer competitive disruptor to deal with.

Yahoo did this with Astrid, the shared checklist app, about a year ago.  I've never gotten checklist apps - they're too imprecise.  I don't have simple tasks, like "take out the trash" that I need to put on a list.  My wife had been pushing for a shared checklist though, and Astrid was at least not insultingly simplistic or [overly skeuomorphic](http://rp3agency.com/blog/thunderbolts-and-lightning-very-very-frightening/).  We used it peacefully for about 2 months. Then, I get the dreaded note - "Yahoo bought Astrid and is going to shut it down in 2 weeks.  Export your tasks."  (Add "figure out how to export Nancy's tasks and what to import them into" to my 100% reliable, never-for-sale Moleskine notebook).

Last December, a big company called PayPal bought a little company called Stackmob.  Stackmob was what is known as a "Platform as a Service" (PaaS) - similarly to signing up for Salesforce, you give them your credit card and get a management interface and access to some pre-built app components to kick start development.  It sounds like a great deal, especially when your app build is on a tight deadline.

Problem is, PayPal didn't really want to get into the PaaS business.  One of Stackmob's functions that it made easy was payment processing from within an iOS app.  Unlike PayPal complex API, it was dirt simple.  So rather than innovate, PayPal bought Stackmob.  Then, 4 months later, I got an email from Stackmob, letting me know that service would cease on May 11th.  I had about 2 months warning to figure out what to do.

Fortunately, we hadn't built anything on Stackmob that was mission critical or revenue generating.  A well-designed system allows you to make changes with a reasonably comeasurate amount of effort to the importance of the component you're swapping.  Stackmob was doing some pretty basic things for us, and so it was, while not trivial, not a four-alarm fire.

But what did PayPal just do to those businesses who used Stackmob's mobile payment function as their sole source of revenue?  Or who had invested heavily in using StackMob's interfaces to Core Data?  Rather than pay for its own team to have room to innovate, Paypal chose to maintain market dominance by externalizing its [technical debt](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technical_debt) onto Stackmob's customers, who now had to race to beat the May 11th deadline, rather than innovating and creating new value for their customers.

What PayPal did with StackMob was rob innovation from the customers of dozens of small startups.  Those companies can quantify the cost of refactoring those apps to use a different platform.  What no one will ever know is what those companies didn't build for us because of Paypal wasting their time - all because an industry giant wasn't innovative enough to outrun an upstart.  We all lose, and it's a damn shame.